referee_rapport.txt

Editors comments:

 Like the referee, I found there was much to like in this paper and overall concluded that it could form a nice addition to the literature. My main observation reflects that of the referee - price should somehow be allowed to have different effects on production depending on where the field is in terms of its lifetime. This seems important and a sensible extension. I therefore invite you to revise and resubmit the paper to the Bulletin. In your revision, please focus closely on the comments of the referee and provide a detailed response to the points made. Whilst I can make no guarantees at this stage as to the ultimate decision on publication, I only invite R&R if I am confident that revisions can be made that will satisfy the referee.


Referee report
The effect of oil price on field production: Evidence from the Norwegian Continental Shelf
Overview
Based on an unbalanced panel data set from oil fields on the Norwegian Continental Shelf, this paper studies the influence of oil price shocks on production from producing fields. A general additive model with cubic regression splines is specified and estimated to single out the underlying structural production profile, based on the assumption that oil price sensitivities apply to residual variation in production. The results suggest that producing fields are quite insensitive to changes in the oil price. The combination of data, methodology, and results represented by this study could potentially contribute positively to the econometric literature on oil supply. However, the below concerns are still meant to suggest that the paper would benefit significantly from a thorough revision.
Major comments

1. This study is limited to ”producing fields”. Oil and gas supply is formed by series of multi‐stage investment decisions in oil and gas companies, including exploration drilling, appraisal drilling, field development, capacity additions, infill drilling, IOR projects etc. This is not a disqualifying feature. However, the author is advised to clarify the scope of this study more closely in the introduction, confine his/her area of interest in the upstream value/investment chain of the oil industry, and describe the actual decisions it might involve (by oil companies).

Reply: I agree, and I have made an effort to clarify the scope of this article in the Introduction and have written: 

"Oil and gas supply, especially in difficult and expensive offshore areas, is the production of an often lengthy and complex chain of conditional investment decisions. Starting with the exploration phase, where a potential oil-producing region or "play" is explored, leases are acquired, prospects are identified and exploration wells are drilled. In the case of a significant hydrocarbon find, a field is appraised to judge size, difficulty and in turn profitability. For fields seen as sufficiently profitable, a development stage commences, where a detailed drilling and production plan is drawn up and submitted to obtain permits and regulatory approval. Operating agreements are signed and subcontractors acquired for offshore construction and well development. Finally, at the end of this multi-year process, a build-out can commence, where full production capacity is built out as fast as possible, followed by an extended depletion phase. All of this consists of what is referred to as upstream activity, with steps such as shipping, refining and trading, among other, making up an equally complex down-stream process. \footnote{\ref{leffler_deepwater} provides an accessible guide to complex offshore petroleum exploration and production industry.} 

A large body of litterature exists on the many aspects of the complex chain of investment and production decisions made in the oil and gas industry. This article looks at the limited, but important topic of producing offshore fields, where a significant gap exists in the literature. "


2. The review of previous literature should be readjusted to better reflect the body of empirical literature in economic journals on oil supply. Examples include Kaufman (1991), Adelman (1993), Watkins and Streifel (1998), Moroney and Berg (1999), Cleveland and Kaufman (2001), Lynch (2002), Watkins (2002), Mohn (2010). Moreover, the author would do well in stressing that estimate price elastisticities of oil supply in previous research often have been related to specific types of investment activities (exploration, development, and other upstream activities), leaving a gap to be explored for fields in production. The below list of references should be considered for a more complete overview.

reply: 

I appreciate the list of suggested references - many of which I was unaware of. I have taken your suggestion and rewritten the litterature overview to focus more on the econometric litterature on oil prices - especially the long-term litterature on regional oil supply (mainly US) that contains relevant discussions on the role of geophysical aspects and scarcity verses purely economic factors to explain oil supply trends. I place my article in the context of this litterature by writing:

"On the surface, this article fits well into the previous econometrics litterature on petroleum supply in that there is a focus on establishing and decomposing the effects of geophysical and economic forces. However, most of the above articles focus on total long-term regional oil supply - which, as I mention above, is the result of a chain of multiple decisions from surveying of potential plays, exploration drilling, and production. This article, on the other hand, is considerably narrower in scope - focusing exclusively on production in active fields. While ambiguity exists if geophysical forces and scarcity is a significant factor that needs to be controlled for in the long term regional perspective, it is without question a dominant factor at the field level."

3. As soon as NCS oil fields are put on stream, the focus of the operating oil company is to ramp up production to full capacity as fast as possible. In this phase of the field life, the oil price is highly unlikely to influence the realized path of production. The situation is quite different as soon as the fields pass their production peak, and enter the decline phase. This phase is characterized by spare capacity, and oil price shocks are therefore far more likely to influence efforts and (short‐term investment) activities that could lift/reduce production temporarily and/or change the life‐time of the field. Infill drilling activities are particularly important in this respect. I would therefore recommend that the econometric assessment allows for variation in the estimated oil price elasticities between the pre‐peak and the post‐peak phase. This feature should be incorporated in the econometric assessment through appropriate split‐sample and/or dummy variable techniques. A crude approach would be to interact the oil price with cumulated production (by field) among the explanatory variables, to test if the oil price elasticity depends on the degree of depletion. An alternative would be to split the entire data set according to positive/negative production growth, and estimate separate oil price elasticities for the two sub‐samples. If my assertion is supported by econometric results, it would also mean that oil production (from producing fields) is more sensitive to oil
price variation in mature oil and provinces than in juvenile provinces. This would also suggest that policies to stimulate production from fields on streams would be more effective in mature provinces.

This is a good point and I have attempted to address the issue by extending my model. A challenge is that that the sub-sample of pre-peak data is relatively small (less than a third of the total). However, the model results do provide some evidence that the price effect is strongest in the draw-down phase. I present and discuss these results on p., and in a footnote give credit to the anonymous referee for the idea.  

I also discuss policy implications of these findings in the manner you suggested in the conclusion on p. x

"The findings in this article have policy implications for both energy industry regulators and financial policy makers. Since the evidence points to a stronger lagged effect of price on production in declining fields, this would imply that policy measures meant to stimulate increased production would likely also be more effective in mature oil producing areas. ""

Minor comments
a. Charts to illustrate historical investment (by category) on the NCS would be useful as background information. This would hightlight the role and relevance of investments in producing fields. The data is available at http://ssb.no/en/energi‐og‐ industri/statistikker/oljeinv

b. The discussion of government take on page 9 (lines 18‐24) should include the State’s Direct Financial Interest (managed by Petoro AS), which really can be seen as an extension of the petroleum taxation system.

This is a good point, I have expaned this paragraph to read as follows:

"Profits from oil and gas production in Norway are subject to a resource tax of 51 \% on top of the ordinary income tax of 27 \%, thus income from petroleum production is taxed at a total marginal rate of 78 \%.  The central government also receives revenues through its majority ownership stake in Statoil. In addition, a wholly state-owned company, Petero, manages the development licenses that the state retains - referred to as the State's Direct Financial Interest (SDFI)."


c. Readers should be reminded about the neutrality aspects of the Norwegian system of petroleum taxation, implying that fields that are profitable before tax will also be profitable after tax (page 9). Before 2005, oil companies would have to be in tax position to be able to deduct exploration expenses. After 2005, new entrants with no taxable income got this deductcion up front as a direct transfer from the government.

This is a good point, I have added some discussion on the matter and a reference to a more detailed description:

"The tax system is also designed to be neutral, that is a field that is profitable before tax should also be profitable after tax. This is accomplished by only taxing the net-profits of oil companies, allowing companies to deduct and carry forward losses, and deducting investment costs.\footnote{The Norwegian Oil and Gas industry group Norsk Petroleum provides a detailed overview: \url{http://www.norskpetroleum.no/en/framework/petroleum-tax/}}
"


d. The definition of oil‐in‐place should be clearly defined. If this measure is based on geological information, there should be no correlation with oil prices (on page 9, the author argues it is “unlikely to be correlated with prices). It also remains unclear why this variable enters with subscript it in the econometric model. Standard definitions of oil‐in‐place remain constant over time.


e. A table summary of descriptive statistics would be useful for the introduction/discussion of the data set.


f. The manuscript needs proper proofreading.


References

Adelman, Morris A. 1993. Modelling world oil supply. The Energy Journal 14 (1), 1‐32. 

Cleveland, C. J. and R. K. Kaufmann. 1991. Forecasting ultimate oil recovery and its rate of production: Incorporating economic factors into the models of M. King Hubbert. The Energy Journal 12, 17‐46.

Kaufmann, R. K. 1991. Oil production in the lower 48 states: Reconciling curve‐fitting and econometric models. Resources and Energy 13, 111‐127.

Kaufmann, R. K. and C. J. Cleveland. 2001. Oil production in the lower 48 states: Economic, geological, and institutional determinants. The Energy Journal 22 (1), 27‐49.

Lynch, M. 2002. Forecasting oil supply: theory and practice. The Quarterly Review of Economic and Finance 42, 373‐389.

Mohn, K. 2010. Elastic oil: a primer on the economics of exploration and production. In E. Bjørndal et al. (eds.), Energy, Natural Resources and Environmental Economics. Springer. Berlin Heidelberg.

Moroney, J. R. and M. D. Berg (1999) An integrated model of oil production. The Energy Journal 20 (1), 105‐124.

Watkins, G. C. 2002. Characteristics of North Sea oil reserve appreciation. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 22, 335‐372.

Watkins, C. J. and S. S. Streifel. 1998. World crude oil supply: Evidence from estimating supply functions by country. Journal of Energy Finance and Development 3 (1), 23‐48.